#### <font color="green0"><u>Definition:</u></f>

#shell 

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>Bash:</u></f>

#### <font color="green0"><u>Definition:</u></f>

BASH stands for "Bourne Again Shell." It is a popular command-line interpreter and scripting language used primarily in Unix-based operating systems, including Linux and macOS. BASH is the default shell for many Linux distributions.

The term "Bourne Again SHell" is a wordplay on the original Unix shell called the "Bourne shell" (sh), which was developed by Stephen Bourne. BASH was created as an enhanced version of the Bourne shell, providing additional features and improvements.

BASH offers a powerful command-line interface (CLI) where users can interact with the operating system by executing commands, running scripts, and managing files and directories. It supports a wide range of built-in commands and utilities, as well as the ability to define and execute complex shell scripts.

Some key features of BASH include:
1. Command Execution: BASH allows users to execute commands directly from the command line or as part of shell scripts.

2. Scripting Language: BASH provides a scripting language with features like variables, control structures (if-else, loops), functions, and input/output redirection.

3. Environment Variables: BASH allows users to define and manipulate environment variables, which are used to store information that can be accessed by the shell and other programs.

4. Command Line Editing: BASH offers command line editing capabilities, including history recall, command completion, and customizable key bindings.

5. Job Control: BASH supports job control, allowing users to manage and control multiple running processes in the shell.

BASH has become the de facto standard shell for Unix-like systems due to its versatility, widespread adoption, and extensive support from the open-source community. It provides a powerful and flexible environment for both interactive use and automation through shell scripting.

#### <font color="green0"><u>History:</u></f>

Bash was created by Brian Fox in 1989 as a free and improved version of sh.

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>Start writing bash script:</u></f>

To start writing bash script you want to firstly write a shebang line.
#### <font color="green0"><u>What is shebang?</u></f>

A #shebang line is the first line of a script file that tells the operating system what program to use to execute the commands in the file.
#### <font color="green0"><u>The shebang line:</u></f>

```shebang

#!/bin/bash

```

 which means use the bash shell located in the /bin directory to run the script. The # symbol is sometimes called hash or pound, and the ! symbol is sometimes called bang or exclamation mark. Together, they form the word shebang.
#### <font color="green0"><u>Importance of shebang:</u></f>

The shebang line is important because there are different types of shells and scripting languages that have different syntax and features. For example, bash, sh, csh, perl, python, ruby, and php are some of the common shells and scripting languages that can be used to write scripts. By specifying the shebang line, you can ensure that your script will run correctly with the intended interpreter.
#### <font color="green0"><u>Run bash as an exe:</u></f>

You then want to change the access permissions of the file from .sh to .exe 

write this command:

```chmod
chmod +x bash.sh
```

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>1-Dealing with variables:</u></f>

#### <font color="green0"><u>1.1-Local variables:</u></f>

```Local_variable
MSG="Hello, BASH!"
```

```print
echo ${MSG}
```
#### <font color="green0"><u>1.2-Take arguments from the user:</u></f>

```shell
echo Enter your first name: 
read FIRST_NAME
echo Enter your last name: 
read LAST_NAME

echo Hello $FIRST_NAME $LAST_NAME
```
#### <font color="green0"><u>1.3-Positional arguments:</u></f>

```positional_args
echo Hello $1 $2
```

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>2-Input/Output redirection:</u></f>

#### <font color="green0"><u>2.1-Piping:</u></f>

##### <font color="sky blue"><u>2.1.1-pipe symbol:</u></f>
The pipe symbol in Linux command is a powerful operator that allows you to connect the output of one command to the input of another command. It is also known as a **pipeline**. The pipe symbol is represented by the vertical bar character (|) and is usually placed between two commands. For example, if you want to search for a word in a file, you can use the pipe symbol to combine the cat command and the grep command:

`cat file.txt | grep word`

This command will first display the contents of file.txt using the cat command, and then pass the output to the grep command, which will filter out only the lines that contain the word you are looking for. The pipe symbol can be used with any commands that can read from standard input and write to standard output. You can also use multiple pipe symbols to create a chain of commands, each one processing the output of the previous one. For example, if you want to sort the output of the previous command alphabetically, you can add the sort command:

`cat file.txt | grep word | sort`

This command will first display the contents of file.txt, then filter out the lines with the word, and then sort them in ascending order.
##### <font color="sky blue"><u>2.1.2-grep command:</u></f>
The grep command is a powerful tool for searching text files in Linux. It allows you to find lines that match a given pattern, which can be a simple string or a complex regular expression. You can use grep to search one or more files, or even the output of other commands. Here are some examples of how to use grep in Linux:
- To search for the word “linux” in a file named “sample.txt”, you can use the command:

`grep linux sample.txt`

- To search for the word “linux” in all files in the current directory, you can use the wildcard character (*):

`grep linux *`

- To search for the word “linux” in all files in the current directory and its subdirectories, you can use the recursive option (-r):

`grep -r linux .`

- To search for the word “linux” in a case-insensitive way, you can use the ignore-case option (-i):

`grep -i linux sample.txt`

- To search for a phrase, such as “linux handbook”, you can enclose it in quotation marks:

`grep "linux handbook" sample.txt`

- To search for lines that start with “linux”, you can use the caret symbol (^) as an anchor:

`grep ^linux sample.txt`

- To search for lines that end with “linux”, you can use the dollar sign ($) as an anchor:

`grep linux$ sample.txt`

- To search for lines that contain either “linux” or “unix”, you can use the pipe symbol (|) as an OR operator:

`grep "linux|unix" sample.txt`

- To search for lines that do not contain “linux”, you can use the invert-match option (-v):

`grep -v linux sample.txt`

- To count the number of lines that match a pattern, you can use the count option (-c):

`grep -c linux sample.txt`

---
#### <font color="green0"><u>2.2-Output redirection:</u></f>

`> symbol is used to write to a file`
##### <font color="heavy blue"><u>Example:</u></f>  
```
echo Hello world! > hello.txt
```

`>> symbol is used to append to a file`
##### <font color="heavy blue"><u>Example:</u></f>  
```
echo Hello world! >> hello.txt
```

---
#### <font color="green0"><u>2.3-Input redirection:</u></f>

The symbols < and << are used for input redirection in Linux. Input redirection is a feature that allows you to feed data from a file or another command to a command that normally expects data from the keyboard (standard input). For example, if you want to sort the contents of a file named data.txt, you can use the sort command with input redirection:

`sort < data.txt`

This will print the sorted lines of data.txt to the screen (standard output).

The difference between < and << is that < redirects data from a file, while << redirects data from a string or a here document. A here document is a way of specifying multiple lines of input without using a file. For example, if you want to print a message with multiple lines using the echo command, you can use << with a delimiter:

`echo << END This is a multi-line message END`

This will print the following output:

`This is a multi-line message`

The delimiter (END in this case) can be any word that does not appear in the input. It marks the end of the here document.

The symbol <<< is another form of input redirection in Linux. It is similar to <<, but instead of using a here document, it uses a here string. A here string is a single word or a quoted string that follows the <<< symbol. For example, if you want to count the number of characters in the word “linux”, you can use the wc command with <<<:

`wc -m <<< linux`

This will print the number 6, which is the number of characters in “linux” plus a newline character. The <<< symbol allows you to pass a string as an argument to a command that expects input from a file or standard input. You can also use variables or command substitutions in a here string. For example, if you want to print the current date and time using the date command, you can use <<< with $( ):

`echo <<< $(date)`

This will print something like “Thu Sep 21 08:22:28 UTC 2023”.

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>3-Test operators:</u></f>

```
[ hello = hello ]
echo $?
```

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>4-Conditions:</u></f>

#### <font color="green0"><u>4.1-If/elif/else:</u></f>

```
#!/bin/bash

if [ "${1}" = "Ali" ]; then 
	echo "Welcome Ali"
elif [ "${1}" = "Adel" ]; then
	echo "Welcome Adel"
else
	echo "Not welcomed"
fi
```
#### <font color="green0"><u>4.2-Case statements:</u></f>

*<u>Better than if/elif/else when:</u>*
1-Checking for multiple values.
2-Is easier to read.

```
#!/bin/bash

case ${1} in 
	"Ali" | "ali")
		echo "welcome Ali" 
	;;
	"Adel" | "adel")
		echo "welcome Adel" 
	;;
	*)
		echo "Not welcomed"
	;;
esac
```

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>5-Arrays:</u></f>

```
LIST=( one two three four five )
echo $LIST # Prints the first element
echo ${LIST[@]} # Prints all elements
echo ${LIST[1]} # Prints the second element
```

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>6-Loops:</u></f>

#### <font color="green0"><u>6.1-For loops:</u></f>

```
#!/bin/bash

LIST=( one two three four five )

for i in ${LIST[@]} ;
	do echo $i;
 done
```

#### <font color="green0"><u>6.2-While loops:</u></f>

```
#!/bin/bash

LIST=( one two three four five )

i=0

while [ $i -le 4 ] ; 
	do 
	echo ${LIST[i]}
	i=$(($i+1))
 done
 
```

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>7-Functions:</u></f>

#### <font color="green0"><u>7.1-Create a function:</u></f>

```
#!/bin/bash

showuptime()
{

	UP=$(uptime -p | cut -c4-)
	SINCE=$(uptime -s | cut -c1-10)
	
	cat << EOF
	----
	This machine hs been up for ${UP}
	It has been running since ${SINCE}
	----
EOF
}

showuptime

```
#### <font color="green0"><u>7.2-Passing argument:</u></f>

```
#!/bin/bash

showname()
{
	echo Hello $1
}

showname $1

```
#### <font color="green0"><u>7.3-Exit code:</u></f>

```
#!/bin/bash

showname()
{
	
	isUSR=0
	
	echo Hello $1
	
	if [ $1 = "Ali" ]; then
		isUSR=1
	else
		isUSR=0
	fi
	
	return ${isUSR}
	
}

showname $1

if [ $? = 1 ]; then
	echo "You are welcomed"
else
	echo "Not welcomed"
fi

```

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>8-AWK:</u></f>

AWK is a scripting language and a command-line tool that can be used to process and manipulate text files in Linux. [AWK stands for **A**ho, **W**einberger, and **K**ernighan, the names of the three people who wrote the original version of AWK in 1977](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AWK)[1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AWK). AWK can perform various operations on text files, such as scanning, splitting, comparing, formatting, arithmetic, and string operations. AWK can also generate formatted reports from the input data. AWK works by applying rules that consist of patterns and actions to each line of the input file. If a line matches a pattern, the corresponding action is executed on that line. AWK can also use variables, functions, control flow statements, and scripts to perform more complex tasks. You can learn more about AWK and its features from the web search results I found for you. 😊

Some examples of AWK commands are:
- To print the first field of each line in a file: `awk '{print $1}' file.txt`
- To print the lines that contain the word “Linux”: `awk '/Linux/ {print}' file.txt`
- To print the sum of the second column of a file: `awk '{sum += $2} END {print sum}' file.txt`
- To print the lines that have more than four fields: `awk 'NF > 4 {print}' file.txt`
- To print the words that are separated by commas: `awk -F, ' {for (i=1; i<=NF; i++) print $i}' file.txt`
- To print the words that are separated by semicolons or colons: `awk -F '[;:]' ' {for (i=1; i<=NF; i++) print $i}' file.txt`
- To print the first word of a string: `awk ' {split ("hello world", a, " "); print a [1]}'`

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>9-SED:</u></f>

SED is a command-line tool that can be used to edit text files and streams on Linux and other Unix-like systems. SED stands for **stream editor**, which means that it can process text as a stream of characters, without loading the entire file into memory. SED can perform various operations on text, such as searching, replacing, inserting, deleting, and formatting. SED can also use regular expressions to match patterns and manipulate text more flexibly.

SED is useful for quickly and efficiently modifying text files or streams without opening them in a text editor. [For example, you can use SED to change the configuration of a file, extract information from a log file, format a report, or generate code](https://phoenixnap.com/kb/linux-sed)[3](https://phoenixnap.com/kb/linux-sed)[4](https://www.hongkiat.com/blog/linux-command-sed/). You can also combine SED with other commands and tools to create powerful pipelines and scripts.

To use SED, you need to provide instructions for it to follow as it works through the text. These instructions are called **SED commands**, and they consist of patterns and actions. A pattern specifies what text to match, and an action specifies what to do with the matched text. You can write SED commands in a file (called a **SED script**) or directly on the command line. You can also specify options to modify the behavior of SED.

Here are some examples of how to use SED:
- To replace the word “foo” with “bar” in a file: `sed 's/foo/bar/' file.txt`
- To delete the lines that start with “#” in a file: `sed '/^#/d' file.txt`
- To insert “Hello World” at the beginning of a file: `sed '1iHello World' file.txt`
- To print only the lines that contain “Linux” in a file: `sed -n '/Linux/p' file.txt`

---
## <font color="yellow"><u>10-bashrc:</u></f>

